Human immune-deficiency virus, HIV, is a virus that infects human cells. When HIV infects a cell, the cell synthesizes a
viral protein called HIV protease. The function of HIV protease is to bind and cut another viral protein called Gag-Pol to
create two separate proteins, Gag and Pol. A newly discovered strain of HIV makes an altered form of the HIV protease
that differs by a single amino acid substitution from the normal protease.
Based on this information and your knowledge about biology, select true or false for each of the following
statements.
a) T/F This altered protease is the result of a mutation within the viral genome.
b) T/F This altered protease could be more efficient at cutting Gag-Pol than the normal protease.
c) T/F This altered protease could bind less tightly to the Gag-pol protein.
d) T/F The HIV strain that makes this altered protease could be resistant to drugs designed to block the function of the
normal protease.
e) T/F This altered protease will likely be shorter than the normal protease.
Knowledge statements:
a) Viruses carry their own genomes that become expressed within cellular hosts. A mutation within the viral genome can
lead to changes in the products expressed from the viral genome.
b) A single amino acid change in a protein can change the structure of a protein causing that protein to function more
efficiently.
c) A single amino acid change in a protein can change the structure of a protein causing that protein to function less
efficiently.
d) Mutations can confer viral drug resistance by changing the ability of a drug to bind its viral target.
e) A mutation that causes a single amino acid substitution in a protein will not likely change the overall length of the
polypeptide.

A single species of bacteria only spreads by physical contact between living birds of the same species. The bacteria infect
the birds’ eyes and can cause inflammation leading to blindness and death.
Over the past 15 years, the way this bacterial species infects and kills birds has shifted: an Eastern Canadian strain now
causes severe infection and rapid death, while strains of the same species of bacteria that spread to Western Canada do not
cause severe infection or death. Although birds in Western Canada do not experience severe infection and do not die, the
Western bacterial strain still lives in these birds. Both strains of bacteria divide every 20 minutes, while birds take
approximately 3 years to reach reproductive age.
Based on this information and your knowledge about biology, select true or false for each of the following
statements.
a) T/F During this 15 year period, both bacterial strains have the capacity to accumulate genetic changes more rapidly
than birds.
b) T/F The Eastern Canadian bacterial strain is still evolving, but Eastern Canadian birds are no longer evolving.
c) T/F In Western Canada, a bird that survives bacterial infection due to the bird’s specific genetic makeup is likely to
have offspring who survive infection by the same strain of bacteria.
d) T/F The difference in the severity of infection in Eastern and Western Canada could be due to genetic differences in
Eastern and Western bird hosts.
Knowledge Statements
a) Species that reproduce more rapidly or have higher mutation rates have the capacity to accumulate genetic changes
more rapidly than those with slower reproduction rates.
b) All species continue to evolve.
c) If an organism has a genetically based fitness advantage, then this organism’s offspring are also likely to have this
fitness advantage.
d) A pathogen can have different effects in different subgroups of a species due to underlying genetic differences between
the subgroups. Genetic differences in subgroups can also drive the divergent evolution of a pathogen.


During the course of normal human development, the muscle myosin protein becomes expressed in muscle cells but not in
non-muscle cells, such as liver cells.
Based on this information and your knowledge about biology, select true or false for each of the following
statements.
a) T/F This expression pattern could result from the muscle myosin gene being present in muscle cells but not in liver
cells.
b) T/F This expression pattern could result from the regulatory sequence of the muscle myosin gene being different in
muscle cells compared to liver cells.
c) T/F This expression pattern could result from epigenetic modifications, such as DNA methylation, being present on
the myosin gene in liver cells but not in muscle cells.
d) T/F This expression pattern could result from a transcription factor that activates expression of the muscle myosin
gene being present in muscle cells but not in liver cells.
Knowledge statements:
a) Different cell types have the same genetic composition. With some exceptions, cell-type specific gene expression
patterns are not caused by the programmed loss of genes during development.
b) Different cell types have the same genetic composition. While single cells may develop mutations, cell-type specific
gene expression patterns are not the result of programmed mutations during development.
c) Different chemical modifications to DNA and associated histone proteins can occur in different cell types, leading to
changes in gene expression.
d) Different transcription factor proteins are selectively expressed in different cell types, contributing to differences in
gene expression between these cell types.